# ES6

## Introduction to ES6

ECMAScript is a standardized version of JavaScript with the goal of unifying the language's specifications and features. As all major browsers and JavaScript-runtimes follow this specification, the term ECMAScript is interchangeable with the term JavaScript.

Most of the challenges on freeCodeCamp use the ECMAScript 5 (ES5) specification of the language, finalized in 2009. But JavaScript is a n evolving programming language. As features are added and revisions are made, new versions of the language are released for use by developers.

The most recent standardized version is called ECMAScript 6, released in 2015. This new version of the language adds some powerful feeatures that will be covered in this section of callenges, including:

* Arrow functions
* Classes
* Modules
* Promises
* Generators
* `let` and `const`

**Note**
Not all browsers support ES6 features. If you use ES6 in your own projects, you may need to use a program (transpiler) to convert your ES6 code into ES5 until browsers support ES6.

## Explore Differences between the var and let Keywords

One of the biggest problems with declaring vaiables with the `var` keyword is that you can overwrite variable declarations without an error.

```js
var camper = 'James';
var camper = 'David';
console.log(camper); // logs 'David'
```

As you can see in the code above, the `camper` variable is originally declared as `James` and then overridden to be `David`. In small application, you might not run into this type of problem, but when your code becomes larger, you might accidentally overwrite a variable that you did not intend to overwrite. Because this behavior does not throw an error, searching and fixing bugs becomes more difficult.

A new keyword called `let` was introduced in ES6 to solve this potential issue with the `var` keyword. If you were to replace `var` with `let` in the variable declarations of the code above, the result would be an error.

```js
let camper = 'James';
let camper = `David`; // throws an error
```

This error can be seen in the console of your browser. So unlike `var`, when using `let`, a variable with the same name can only be declared once. Note the `"use strict". This enables Strict Mode, which catches common coding mistakes and "unsafe" actions. For instance:
```js
"use strict";
x = 3.14; // throws an error because x is not declared
```
## Compare Scopes of the var and let Keywords

When you declare a variable with the `var` keyword, it is declared globally, or locally if declared inside a function.

The `let` keyword behaves similary, but with some extra features. When you declare a variable with the `let`keyword inside a block, statement, or expression, its scope is limited to that block, statement, or expression.

For example:
```js
var numArray = [];
for (var i = 0, i < 3; i++) {
    numArray.push(i);
}
console.log(numArray); // returns [0,1,2]
console.log(i); // returns 3
```
with the `var` keyword, `i` is declared globally. So when `i++`is executed, it updates the global variable. This code is similar to the following:

```js
var numArray = [];
var i;
for (i = 0; i < 3;i++ ) {
    numArray.push(i);
}
console.log(numArray);  // [0,1,2]
console.log(i);         // 3
```
This behavior will cause problems if you were to create a function and store it for later use inside a for loop that uses the `i` variable. This is because the stored function will always refer to the value of the updated global `i` variable.

```js
var printNumTwo;
for (var i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
    if (i === 2) {
        printNumTwo = function() {
            return i;
        };
    }
}
console.log(printNumTwo()); // returns 3
```
As you can see, `printNumTwo()`prints 3 and not 2. This is because the value assigned to `i` was updated and the `printNumTwo()`returns the global `i` and not the value `i` had when the function was created in the for loop. The `let` keyword does not follow this behavior:
```js
'use strict';
let printNumTwo;
for (let i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
    if (i === 2) {printNumTwo = function(){ return i;};}
}
console.log(printNumTwo());     // returns 2
console.log(i);                 // returns "i is not defined"
```
`i` is not defined because it was not declared in the global scope. It is only declared within the for loop statement. `printNumTwo()` returned the correct value because three different `i` variables with unique values (0,1 and 2) were created by the `let` keyword within the loop statement.

## Declare a Read-Only Variable with the const Keyword

The keyword `let` is not the only new way to declare variables. In ES6, you can also declare variables using the `const` keyword.

`const` has all the awesome features that `let` has, with the added bonus that variables declared using `const` are read-only.
They are a constant value, which means that once a variable is assigned with `const`, it cannot be reassigned.

```js
"use strict";
const FAV_PET = "Cats";
FAV_PET = "Dogs";   // returns error
```
As you can see, trying to reassign a variable declared with `const` will throw an error. You should always name variables you don't want to reassign using the `const` keyword.

This helps when you accidentally attempt to reassign a variable that is meant to stay constant. A common practice when naming constants is to use all uppercase letters, withWords seperated by an underscore.

**Note:** It is common for developers to use uppercase variable identiiers for immutable values and lowercase or camelCase for mutable values (objects and arrays). In a later challenge you will see an example of a lowercase variable identifier being used for an array.

## Mutate an Array Declared with const

The `const` declaration has many use cases in modern JavaScript.

Some developers prefer to assign all their variables using `const` by default, unless they know they will need to reassign the value. Only in that case, they use `let`.

However, it is important to understand that objects (including arrays and functions) assigned to a variable using `const` are still mutable. Using the `const` declaration only prevents reassignement of the variable identifier.

```js
"use strict";
const s = [5,6,7];
s = [1,2,3];        // trows error, trying to assign a const
s[2] = 45;          // wors just as it would with an array declared with var or let
console.log(s);     // returns [5,6,45]
```

As you can see, you can mutate the object `[5,6,7]` itself and the variable `s` will still point to the altered array `[5,6,45]`. Like all arrays, the array elements in `s `are mutable, but because `const` was used, you cannot use the variable identifier `s` to point to a different array using the assignemnt operator.

## Prevent Object Mutation

As seen in the previous challenge, `const` declaration alone doesn't really protect your data from mutation. To ensure your data doesn't change, JavaScript provides a function `Object.freeze` to prevent data mutation.

Once the object is frozen, you can no longer add, update, or delete properties from it.

Any attempt at changing the object will be rejected without an error.

```js
let obj = {
    name: "FreeCodeCamp",
    review: "Awesome"
};
Object.Freeze(obj);
obj.review = "bad";     // will be ignored. Mutation not allowed
obj.newProp = "Test";   // will be ignored. Mutation not allowed
console.log(obj);       // {name: "FreeCodeCamp", review:"Awesome"}
```

## Use Arrow Functions to Write Concise Anonymous Functions 

In JavaScript, we often don't need to name our functions, especially when passing a function as an argument to another function. Instead, we create inline functions. We don't need to name these functions because we do not reuse them anywhere else.

To achieve this, we often use the following syntax:
```js
const myFunc = function() {
    const myVar = "value";
    return myVar;
}
```
ES6 provides us with the syntactic sugar to not have to write anonymous functions this way.
Instead, you can use **arrow function syntax**:
```js
const myFunc = () => {
    const myVar = "value";
    return myVar;
}
```
When there is no function body, and only a return value, arrow function syntax allows you to omit the keyword `return` as well as the brackets surrounding the code. This helps simplify smaller functions into one-line statements:
```js
const myFunc = () => "value";
```
This code will still return `value` by default.

## Write Arrow functions with Parameters

Just like aregular function, you can pass arguments into an arrow function.

```js
// doubles input value and returns it
const doubler = (item) => item * 2;
```
If an arrow function has a single argument, the parentheses enclosing the argument may be omitted.

```js
//the same function, without the argument parentheses
const dobler = item => item * 2;
```
It is possible to pass more than one argument into an arrow function.

```js
// multiples the first input value by the secound and returns it
const multiplier = (item, multi) => item * multi;
```

## Set Default Parameters for Your Functions

In order to help us create more flexible functions, ES6 introduces default parameters for functions.

Check out this code:
```js
const greeting = (name = "Anonymous") => "Hello " + name;
console.log(greeting("John"));       // Hello John
console.log(greeting());             // Hello Anonymous
```

The default parameter kicks in when the argument is not specified (it is undefined). As you can see in the example above, the parameter `name` will recieve its default value `"Anonymous"` when you do not provide a value for the parameter. You can add default values for as many parameters as you want.

## Use the Rest Parameter with Function Parameters

In order to help us create more flexible functions, ES6 introduces the **rest parameter** for function parameters. With the rst parameter, you can create functions that take a variable number of arguments. These arguments are stored in an array that can be accessed later from inside the function.

Check out this code:
```js
function howMany(...args) {
    return "You have passed " + args.length + " arguments.";
}
console.log(howMany(0,1,2));            // You have passed 3 arguments.
console.log(howMany("string",null, [1,2,3], {})) // You have passed 4 arguments.
```

The rest parameter eliminates the need to check the `args` array and allows us to apply `map()`, `filter()` and `reduce()`on the parameters array.

```js
const sum = (...args) => {
    return args.reduce((a,b) => a + b, 0);
}
console.log(sum(1,2,3)); // 6
```

## Use the Spread Operator to Evaluate Arrays In-Place

ES6 introduced the *spread operator*, which allows us to expand arrays and other expressions in places where multiple parameters or elements are expected.

The ES5 code below uses `apply()` to compute the maximum value in an array:

```js
var arr = [6, 89, 3, 45];
var maximus = Math.max.apply(null, arr); // returns 89
```

We had to use `Math.max.apply(null, arr)` because `Math.max(arr)` returns `NaN`. `Math.max()` expects comma-separated arguments, but not an array. The spread operator makes this syntax mcuh better to read and maintain.

```js
const arr = [6, 89, 3, 45];
const maximus = Math.max(...arr); // returns 89
```

`...arr` returns an unpacked array. In other words, it *spreads* the array. However, the spread operator only works in-place, like in an argument to a function or in an array literal. The following code will not work:
```js
const spreaded = ...arr; // will throw a syntax error
```

## Use Destructuring Assignment to Extract Values from Objects

*Destructuring assignemnt* is special syntax introduced in ES6, for neatly assigning values taken directly from an object.

Consider the following ES5 code:
```js
const user = { name: 'John Doe', age: 34};

const name = user.name; // name = 'John Doe'
const age = user.age;   // age = 34
```
Here's an equivalent assignment statement using the ES6 destructuring syntax:
```js
const {name, age} = user; // name = 'John Doe', age = 34
```

Here, the `name` and `age` variables will be created and assigned the values of their respective values from the `user` object. You can see how much clenaer this is.

You can extract as many or few values from the object as you want.

## Use Destructuring Assignment to Assign Variables from Objects

Destructuring allows you to assign a new variable name when extracting values. You can do this by putting the new name after a colon when assigning the value.

Using the same object from the last example:
```js
const user = { name: 'John Doe', age: 34}
```

Here's how you can give new variable names in the assignment:

```js
const {name: userName, age: userAge} = user; // userName = 'John Doe', userAge = '34'
```

You may read it as "get the value of `user.name` and assign it to a new variable named `userName`" and so on.

## Use Destructuring Assignment to Assign Variables from nested Objects

You can use the same principles from the previous two lessons to destructure values from nested objects.

Using an object similar to previous examples:

```js
const user = {
    johnDoe: {
        age: 34,
        email: 'johnDoe@freeCodeCamp.com'
    }
};
```

Here's how to extract the values of object properties and assign them to variables with the same name:

```js
const { johnDoe: { age, email}} = user;
```
And here's how you can assign an objects properties' value to variables with different names:
```js
const { johnDoe: {age: userAge, email: userEmail }} = user;
```

```js
const {today: {low: todayLow, high: todayHigh}} = LOCAL_FORECAST;
```

## Use Destructuring Assignment to Assign Variables from Arrays

ES6 makes destructuring arrays s easy as destructuring objects.

One key difference between the spread operator and array destructuing is that the spread operator unpacks all contents of an array into a comma-separated list.

Consequently, you cannot pick or choose which elements you want to assign to variables.

Destructuring an array lets us do exactly that:
```js
const [a,b] = [1,2,3,4,5,6];
console.log(a,b) = 1,2
```
The variable `a` is assigned the first value of the array, and `b` is assigned the second value of  the array. We can also access the value at any index in an array with destructuring by using comas to reach the desired index:
```js
const [a,b,,,c] = [1,2,3,4,5,6];
console.log(a,b,c); // 1,2, 5
```
### Excercise
Use desctructuring assignment to swap the values of `a` and `b`so that `a` recieves the value stored in `b`, and `b`recieves the value stored in `a`.
```js
let a = 8, b = 6;
// change code below this line
[b,a] = [a,b]; // Do not try to re-declare a or b while destructuring as they are already declared in the first let statement.
// change code above this line
console.log(a); // should be 6
console.log(b); // should be 8
```

## Use Destructuring Assignment with the Rest Parameter to Reassign Array Elements

In some situations involving array destructuring, we might want to cllect the rest of the elements into a separate array.

The result is similar to `Array.prototype.slice()`, as shown below:
```js
const [a,b, ...arr] = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7];
console.log(a,b);   // 1, 2
console.log(arr);   // [3, 4, 5, 6, 7];
```

Variables `a` and `b`take the frist and second values from the array. After that, because of rest parameters's presence, `arr` gets rest of the values in the form of an array. 
The rest element only works correctly as the last variable in the list. As in, you cannot use the rest parameter to catch a subarray that leaves out last element of the original array.

### Excercice
use destructuring assignment with the rest parameter to perform an effective `Array.prototype.slice()` so that `arr` is a sub-array of the original array `source` with the frist two elements omitted.

```js
const source = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10];
function removeFirstTwo(list) {
  "use strict";
  // change code below this line
  const [a, b, ...arr] = list; // change this
  // change code above this line
  return arr;
}
const arr = removeFirstTwo(source);
console.log(arr); // should be [3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
console.log(source); // should be [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10];
```

## Use Destructuring Assignemnt to Pass an Object as a Function's Parameter

In some cases, you can destructure the object in a function argument itself.

Consider the code below:
```js
const profileUpdate = (profileData) => {
    const { name, age, nationality, location } = profileData;
    // do something with these variables
}
```
This effectively destructures the object sent into the function. This can also be done in-place:
```js
const profileUpdate = ({name, age, nationality, location}) => {
    /* Do something with these fields */
}
```

This removes some extra lines and makes our code look neat. This has the added benefit of not having to manipulate an entire object in a function - only the fields that are needed are copied inside the function.

### Excercise
Use descturcturing assingment with the argument to the function `half` to send only `max` and `min` inside the function.

```JS
const stats = {
    max: 56.78,
    standard_deviation: 4.34,
    median: 34,54,
    mode: 34.54,
    min: -0.75,
    average: 35.85
};

// change code below this line
const half = ({max, min}) => (max+min)/2.0;
// change code above this line

console.log(stats);         // should be object
console.log(half(stats));   // should be 28.015
```

## Create Strings using Template Literals

A new feature of ES6 is template literal.

This is a special type of string that makes creating complex strings easier.

Template literals allow you to create multi-line strings and to use string interpolation features to create strings.

Consider the code:
```js
const person = {
    name: "Zodiac Hasbro",
    age: 56
};

// Template literal with multi-line and string interpolation
const greeting = `Hello, my name is ${person.name}!
I am ${person.age} years old.`;

console.log(greeting); //prints the following:
// Hello, my name is Zodiac Hasbro!
// I am 56 years onld.
```

A lot of things happend there.

Firstly, the example uses backticks (``` ` ```), not quotes (`"` or `'`), to wrap the string.

Secoundly, notice that the string is multi-line, both in the code and the output. This saves inserting `\n` within strings.

The `${variable}` syntax used above is a placeholder.

Basically, you won't have to use concatenation with the `+` operator anymore. 

To add variables to strings, you just drop the variable in a template string and wrap it with `${` and `}`.

Similarly, you can include other expressions in your string literal, for example `${a + b}`. This new way of creating strings gives you more flexibility to create robust strings.

### Example

```js
//obj
const result = {
    success: ["max-length","no-amd", "prefer-arrow-functions"],
    failure: ["no-var", "var-on-top", "linebreaks"],
    skipped: ["id-blacklist", "no-dup-keys"]
}
// function to make list with Template Literal
function makeList(arr){
    "use strict";

    const resultDisplayArray = [];
    for (let i = 0; i < arr.length; i++) {
        resultDisplayArray.push(`<li class="text-warning">${arr[i]}</li>`);
    }

    return resultDisplayArray;
}

const resultDisplayArray = makeList(result.failure);
// will return: 
// [`<li class="text-warining">"no-var"</li>`, `<li class="test-warning">"var-on-top"</li>`], `<li class="text-warning">"linebreaks"</li>`]
```

## Write Concise Object Literal Declarations Using Object Property Shorthand

ES6 adds some nice support for easily defining object literals.

Consider the following code:
```js
const getMousePosition = (x,y) => ({
    x: x,
    y: y
});
```
` getMousePosition` is a simple function that returns an object containing two propeties. 
ES6 provides the syntactic sugar to eliminate the redundancy of having a to write `x: x`. 
You can simply write `x` once, and it will be converted to `x: x` (or something equivalent) under the hood.

Here is the same function from above rewritten to use this new syntax:
```js
const getMousePosition = (x,y) => ({x,y});
```

### Example

```js
const createPerson = (name, age, gender) => {
    "use strict";
    return {name, age, gender};
}
console.log(createPerson("Zodiac Hasbro", 56, "male"));
// returns a proper object
```

## Wrtie Concise Declarative Functions with ES6

When defining functions within objects in ES5, we have to use the keyword `functions`as follows:
```js
const person = {
    name: "Taylor",
    sayHello: function() {return `Hello! My name is ${this.name}.`;}
};
```

With ES6, you can remove the `function` keyword and colon altogether when defining functions in objects. Here's an example of this syntax:
```js
const person = {
    name: "Taylor",
    sayHello() {return `Hello! My name is ${this.name}.`}
}
```

## Use class Syntax to Define a Constructor Function

ES6 provides a new syntax to create objects, using the **class** keyword.

It should be noted that the `class` syntax is jsut syntax, not a full-fledged class-based implementation of an object-oriented paradigm, unlike in languages such as Java, Python, Ruby, etc.

in ES5, we usually define a constructor function and use the `new` keyword to instantiate an object.

```js
var SpaceShuttle = function(targetPlanet) {
    this.targetPlanet = targetPlanet;
}
var zeus = new SpaceShuttle('Jupiter');
```

The `class` syntax simply replaces the constructor function creation:

```js
class SpaceShuttle {
    constructor(targetPlanet) {
        this.targetPlanet = targetPlanet;
    }
}
const zeus = new SpaceShuttle('Jupiter');
```

It hsould be noted that the `class` keyword declares a new function, to which a constructor is added. This constructor is invoked when `new` is called to create a new object.

**Notes:**

* UpperCamelCase should be used by convetion for ES6 class names, as in SpaceShuttle used above.

* The constructor method is a special method for creating and initializing an object created with a class. You will learn more about it in the Object Oriented Programming section of the JavaScript Algorithms And Data Structures Certification.

### Example

```js
class Vegetable {
    constructor(name) {
        this.name = name;
    }
}

const carrot = new Vegetable("carrot");
console.log(carrot);
console.log(carrot.name);
```

## Use getters and setters to Control Access to an Object

You can obtain values from an object and set the value of a property within an object.

These are classically called *getters* and *setters*.

Getter functions are ment to simply return (get) the value of an object's private variable to the user without the user directly accessing the private variable.

Setter functions are meant to modify (set) the value of an object's private variable based on the value passed into the setter function. 

This change could involve calculations, or even overwriting the previous value completely.

```js
class Book {
    constructor(author) {
        this._author = author;
    }
    //getter
    get writer() {
        return this._author;
    }
    //setter
    set writer(updated Author) {
        this._author = updatedAuthor;
    }
}

const lol = new Book("anonymous");
console.log(lol.writer);        // anonymous
lol.writer = "wut";
console.log(lol.writer);        // wut
```

Notice the syntax used to invoke the getter and setter.
They do not even look like functions.

Getters and setters are important because they hide internal implementation details.

**Note**: It is convention to precede the name of a private variable with an undescore(`_`). However, the practice itself does not make a variable private.

### Example

Use the `class` keyword to create a Thermostat class.

The constructor accepts a Fahrenheit temperature.

Now create a `getter` and a `setter` in the class, to pbtain the temperature in Celsius.

Remember that `C = 5/9 * (F - 32)` and `F = C *9.0 / 5 + 32`, where F is the value of temperature in Fahrenheit and `C` is the value of tthe same temperature in Celsius.

**Note**: When you implement this, you will track the temperature inside the class in one scale, either Fahrenheit or Celsius.

This is the power of a getter and a setter. You are creating an API for another user, who can get the correct result regardless of which one you track.

In other words, you are abstracting implementation details from the user.

```js
class Thermostat {
    constructor(temp) {
        this._temp = temp;
    }
    //getter
    get temperature() {
        return this.fToC(this._temp);
    }
    //setter
    set temperature(newTemp) {
        this._temp = this.cToF(newTemp);
    }
    // cToF and fToC
    cToF(c) {
        return c * 9.0 / 5 + 32;
    }
    fToC(f) {
        return 5/9 * (f - 32);
    }
}

//new obj called thermos via class Thermostat
const thermos = new Thermostat(76); 
let temp = thermos.temperature;     // 24.44 in C
thermos.temperature = 26;
temp = thermos.temperature;         // 26 in C
```

