# Making Decisions

Smart programs use *booleans* to make decisions on wether to **run** lines of code or **skip** them.

How to write adaptable code? Welcome the "if statement".

If statements use *booleans* to make decisions on running or skipping code.

The if staement runs code only if the boolean it is relying on is true.

But what if we want to skip code? we use false instead!

The boolean value we've used is called a *condition*.

Conditions decide if the coe runs or gets skipped. They come in right after the keyword, between parentheses.

If statements dont decide on skipping or running the entire code. They only make decicions about a piece of code.

This piece of code is called a *code block*. We write it between curly braces {}.

A code block can be more than a one-liner. We can add as many lines as we want.

A code blcok starts further away from the margin. That's called indentation and it makes the whole code more readable.

Instead of using the boolean true, we can save it in a variable and use that as a condition.
    
    We can use variables as conditions only if their value is a boolean!

```javascript
if (true) {
    console.log("Hello");
}
```

> Addition:  
> if (0 >|| " " || null ) is "false" as well

# Using Conditions

If statements can help us build very sophisticated apps. But for smarter if statements, we need *smarter conditions*.

These conditions are often comparisions. For example, wehen we need to determine if a player has cracked the high score in a game.

To be able to use the results of comparisons multiple times, we can store them in variables.

# Coding Else Statements
Great software has the ability to ame the right decision at the right time.

Let's have a look at how code can decide between one decision or another.

We already know if statements help us to execute code if a certain condition is true.

With the frist if statement we execute code whatever our condition is `true`.

Instead of creating two if statements, we can use the else statement to achieve the same result.

```java
var condition = false;

if (condition) {
 console.log("1");
} else {
 console.log("2");
}
```

We always add the else blcok at the end of our conditional statement.

The order really matters here. 
```java
if () {

} else {

}
```
Else is useful when we want to default action for all other possible scenarios.

# Incorporating Else If
We often have to decide between not just two, but multiple different options.

We can use the words `else if` to add other specific conditions to our conditional statement.

When using a conditonal staement, we  can always execute only one possible scenario.

Sometimes multiple specified conditions may be met. Even so, we'll never execute more than one code block.

After an if statement, we can use as many else if statements as we want.

```java
if () {

} else if {

} else if {

} else {

}
```

